Print
Feb. 13, 2024, 11:30 AM UTC
 / 
Updated
 
Feb. 13, 2024, 1:26 PM UTC
By 
Megan Lebowitz
WASHINGTON — House Republican Conference Chair 
Elise Stefanik
 has filed a complaint against New York Attorney General 
Letitia James
 over her multimillion-dollar civil fraud case against former President Donald Trump, NBC News has exclusively learned.
Stefanik, R-N.Y., alleges that James is "conducting a biased investigation and prosecution" of Trump and "attacking" him through "extrajudicial statements," her letter to the New York Committee on Professional Standards says.
She also argues that James made "highly inappropriate and prejudicial comments on social media" and asks that the Attorney Grievance Committee investigate James and issue consequences, such as disbarring or suspending her.
Stefanik, a staunch ally of Trump's who is seen as 
a potential running mate
, has filed multiple ethics complaints against judges associated with cases against Trump or the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol. In November, she filed an ethics complaint against state Judge 
Arthur Engoron
, who is presiding over the New York civil fraud case against Trump, and the following month she filed a complaint against U.S. District Judge 
Beryl Howell
, based in Washington, D.C., who has overseen Jan. 6-related cases.
"While all Americans possess the right to express their opinions on matters of public interest, attorneys — particularly state attorneys general — are held to a higher standard due to their unique role as officers of the court," Stefanik said in a statement.
The 
former president
 has previously claimed that James "hates" him and doesn't want him "to get elected."
James this year called for a 
$370 million fine
 against Trump and his companies, as well as a lifetime ban on him and two former company executives from the New York real estate industry. Trump has denied any wrongdoing. A verdict in the case 
is expected 
sometime this month.
The state attorney general's office 
has argued
 that Trump and his company falsely inflated statements to financially benefit themselves with better bank loans and insurance policies. James alleged that Trump overstated his 
net worth
 by as much as $2.2 billion one year.
Trump has repeatedly 
launched
 criticisms against James, at times calling her "rogue," "corrupt" and "out of control." Engoron imposed a 
gag order
 on Trump last year after he disparaged a law clerk on social media; he called the attack "unacceptable" and "inappropriate." An appeals court temporarily blocked the gag order.
Trump faces a slew of 
legal woes
, including charges related to allegations he tried to overturn the results of the 2020 election, his handling of classified documents and allegations of falsifying business records related to hush money payments to an adult film star in 2016.
Megan Lebowitz
Megan Lebowitz is a politics reporter for NBC News.